# The x86 Architecture

The x86 instruction set architecture has been, and continues to, be used widely. It is currently available in two flavours: 32-bit and (the more recent) 64-bit.

## Registers
x85 has the following special registers:
1. Instruction Pointer register (IP): the location of the next instruction to be executed
1. FLAGS (F): a number of single-bit flags related to the current processor status

x86 has the following 8 general purpose registers (GPR) in descending order of 'importance':
1. Accumulator register (AX): used in arithmetic ops
1. Counter register (CX): used in shift ops and loops
1. Data register (DX): used in arithmetic ops and I/O ops
1. Base register (BX): used as a pointer to data 
1. Stack Pointer register (SP): pointer to the top of the stack
1. Stack Base Pointer register (BP): pointer to the base of the stack
1. Source Index register (SI): used as a pointer to a source in a stream op
1. Destination Index register (DI): used a a pointer to the destination in a stream op

You can use the abbreviations above to access the lower 16-bits of the registers.

Prepend an 'E' to access the 32-bit register, likewise prepend 'R' for 64-bit (e.g. AX -> EAX)

On x86-64, there are some extra GPRs accessed using R8-15. Also, there are the 128-bit registers XMM0-7.

## Memory

This architecture is little-endian, meaning that multi-byte values are written least sig. byte first (only bytes, not individual bits). e.g. 0x1BA583D4 -> D4 83 A5 1B

It also represents negatives integers using Two's Complement (e.g. to negate a value: invert all bits and add one)

When we execute code, its layout in memory will look something like this:

Low Addresses                             High Addresses
 |   Code   |  Data  |  BSS  |  Heap->       <-Stack  |

- Code: read-only machine code to be executed
- Data and BSS: contains non-executable global variables that can be accessed by any function. Data contains such variables that have been assigned an initial variable, whereas BSS holds the uninitialised variables.
- Stack: Holds local variables (either statically asigned values or pointers to their values in the heap). The stack grows downwards and the top element is kept track of by the Stack Pointer (SP)
- Heap: Holds memory allocated dynamically by the user (e.g. malloc)

In fact, the stack is further divided into stack frames. A stack frame is the bunch of memory dedicated to a function we call, including local variables as well as information of the context from when the function was called. We keep track of frames using the Base Pointer (BP) register.

SP helps us address local variables, BP helps us address parameters.

Say we have a function func(p1, p2, ... , pn). When we call a function, it first has to do some prolog stuff (the first instruction of which is at address Z). This is what the registers/stack look like a

IP: Z, SP: Y, BP: X
Low Addresses                             High Addresses
|                                       <-Caller stack | ...
                                        Y              X

When the instruction at Z is executed, the parameters of func are pushed in reverse order to the stack, followed by the return address V for when we complete func.

IP: U, SP: W, BP: X
Low Addresses                             High Addresses
|                      <-V, p1, ... ,pn | Caller stack | ...
                       W                Y              X

The next instruction is now U which is the actual call to func - updating the IP to the address S of its first instruction. But before executing S, the current BP is put on the stack (for when we return to the caller), and the BP register is updated to the current SP minus wordsize (e.g. old top is now the new bottom). We also push any local variable used in our function.

IP: S, SP: T, BP: W'
Low Addresses                             High Addresses
|    <-varn, ..., var1, X, V, p1, ... ,pn | Caller stack | ...
     T               W' W                 Y              X
     <----------func stack frame---------->
     < vars, return_bp, return_ip, params > 

Just as we have a function prolog, there is a function epilog for when it completes its main task. First, the SP is set to the address in BP (discarding local vars). Then, the value stored at BP/SP (remember: the BP of the caller) is popped back into BP. The SP will now be at the location where the caller return address is stored, which is popped into the IP.

## Addressing and Calling

The general addressing mode is opcode operand1 operand2 with operand1 being the destination.

In general, parameters to a function are pushed to its stack from frame right to left (e.g. for foo(a, b, c), STACK: c, b, a <-SP). However, parameters can also be stored in GPRs:

On x86-32, there are several calling conventions:
- cdelc: params pushed to stack, caller cleans stack
- stdcall: params pushed to stack, callee cleans stack
- fastcall: first 3 params to EAX, EDX, ECX, rest on stack
- thiscall: pointer to OOP object in ECX, rest on stack

On x86-64:
- Unix-like:
    - RDI, RSI, RDX, RCX, R8, R9 for first six ints/pointers
    - XMM0-7 for certain floats
    - rest on stack
    - return values in RAX and RDX
- Microsoft:
    - RCX, RDX, R8, R9 for first four int/pointers, 
    - XMM0-3 for floats
    - rest on stack


